Amen.
Please be seated.
And if you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn with me to John chapter 1.
This morning and next week, these Sundays after Christmas, we're detouring from our study in Ephesians.
We'll pick that back up, Lord willing, on January 11.
But Christmas is a season where we think about the Son of God,
and the Son of God incarnate the inflesement of God.
And Christmas is a season where Christians rejoice that He is like us, and so He gets us.
He knows what it is to be like one of us, but we also, as Christians, worship Jesus because He's unlike us.
He is God in the flesh.
This morning, let's
Focus chiefly on, not exclusively, the fact that he is God and Lord willing next week some lessons from his humanity.
But let me then invite you to hear God's holy and inspired word from John chapter one verses one to five and verse 14.
In the beginning was the word and the word was with God and the word was God.
He was in the beginning with God.
All things were made through Him.
And without Him was not anything made that was made.
In Him was life.
And the life was the light of men.
The light shines in the darkness.
And the darkness has not overcome it.
Verse 14.
And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.
And we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
Amen, let's pray together.
Our Father, thank you for the gift of our Lord Jesus.
We pray that by the work of the Spirit, you would enlighten the eyes of our hearts in the knowledge of Him.
We ask that you would help us to love you not only with our heart,
and soul and strength, but also with our minds as we think your thoughts after you about you and your son.
And so help us we pray and bless us by it in Jesus' name.
Amen.
It's the season for songs and carols.
Our, well, one favorite around here is Hark the Herald Angels sing.
And if I had my act together, we would have sung it this morning,
But it's so well known, you know, it was composed as a hymn for Christmas Day by Charles Wesley.
Its words have sometimes been tweaked or perverted over the years, a moment on that, you know, that stands a Christ by highest heaven adored, Christ the everlasting Lord, late in time behold him come off spring of the Virgin's womb,
veiled in flesh the Godhead see, hail the incarnate deity, pleased as man with men to dwell, Jesus our Emmanuel.
Well, I think we're singing that four, at least four times around here, we're getting over the holiday season, one more to come I think in the next couple of weeks, but what you may or may not realize is that
People have toyed with these words, and not always to a good end.
And, you know, the very famous Mormon tabernacle choir, which does produce some beautiful music, though, because of their theology, they don't sing veiled in flesh the Godhead sea, hail the incarnate deity.
Instead, they sing veiled in flesh, our Lord is He, Savior through eternity.
And that's not just a style change.
That is a very pointed change in a major theological point of the hymn.
And that's because Mormons don't believe that Jesus is the one true and everlasting God.
For them, Jesus is not the eternal God in human flesh.
He's not the incarnate deity.
He's not, as we saying in O come O you faithful, God of God and light of light.
And so they have a very different understanding of who Jesus is, and that makes its way into their carols, the very truth at the heart of Christianity, however, is the celebration that Jesus is fully God and fully man.
And so they changed the lyrics, but John here has a word or two to say to us about the truth, about
our Lord Jesus.
And I want to point out six things from the passage this morning as we consider this very clear and direct teaching about our Lord Jesus Christ.
And it's so important before we look at the six things.
It's so important that we see Jesus rightly.
You know, so that the conscience of Christians can be free to worship Him, bow before Him, praise Him,
And not simply to say, Jesus is amazing, or Jesus is close to God, or Jesus was some spiritual guru with worthwhile things to say, but that we can actually bow in praise of him as our God.
But you need to believe that he's God, you need to see that he's God.
If you're gonna do that with the liberty of conscience, which we need.
And so John here in the passage is telling us that
that he is God, and he's God in flesh.
God dwelt among us.
Some of you will know C.S.
Lewis's Chronicles of Narnia.
And in the last book, the last battle with Tyrion and Lord Diggeria looking into a stable, and they say something astonishing that the inside of the stable is bigger than the outside.
I mean, that seems absurd on its face, but the inside is bigger than the outside, and Lucy says, you know what?
In our world, too, a stable once had something in it bigger than the whole world.
A stable once had something bigger in it than the whole world.
God in a stable.
John tells us here that we would worship Christ in reverence and awe.
So let's think about this infinite becoming finite, this eternal one becoming part of time, this invisible one becoming visible with six things.
First, notice his pre-existence, his pre-existence.
I'll give him to you as we go.
But that's first one, the first phrase.
In the beginning was the word.
What John is telling us here is that Jesus himself has no beginning,
He predates the beginning.
He's purposefully having you think back to the first one in the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
In the beginning of the universe, Jesus already was.
He pre-exists all things.
And if we want to understand Him, we need to see that, that before the atoms
were made before the photons and protons and electrons and all the tons.
And I don't know.
You scientists tell me later, before all of that, Jesus already was.
And as Colossians 1 17 says, he is before all things and in him all things hold together.
He created them all and sustains them all.
He upholds them all by the word of his power.
And so in the beginning was the word.
There never was a time when he was not.
That's his pre-existence to creation.
But then notice his co-existence with God.
In the beginning was the word, next phrase, and the word was with God.
He was face to face with God.
He was God and he was with God.
God with God, God of God, light of,
light.
And John uses this little preposition that can mean not simply with or alongside it, but it can mean towards or even moving towards one another.
The Father and the Word, two distinct persons face to face.
So that it's a hint, isn't it?
It's a hint of that reality that in the eternal being,
the eternal divine essence of the one divine deity.
There is this fellowship or communion of persons, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, loving one another and delighting in one another.
The Word here distinct from the Father and the Father distinguishable from the Word and the Father and the Word distinguishable from the Spirit, and yet Jesus can say
of himself.
I am in the Father and the Father is in me."
Jesus could also say, I am the Father or one.
And he who has seen me has seen the Father.
So there's the Father and there's the Son and there's this then in the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God.
That's His coexistence.
And then you see his divine existence.
Let's just say it explicitly, as John does, in the beginning was the Word.
And the Word was with God, unless you misunderstood him so far.
And the Word was God, he says.
He himself was fully God.
Nothing less than God.
Not some minor deity with a lowercase G, right?
Not some created angel.
not something higher than the angels, but less than God himself, but fully God.
And that's really important for us to think through.
And I want to spend a little time thinking about that this morning, because most wrong views about Jesus try to make him out to be something simpler than he is, as opposed to trying to make him out to be more complicated than he is.
And it's
complicated in a manner of speaking.
It's mind puzzling in a way.
If you think you have your head entirely wrapped around and thoroughly understand the doctrine of the Trinity, then you are confused.
As another has said, if you have a God so small that you can fully comprehend Him in every way,
then you have a God too little to be worshiped.
But no, it's amazing.
He is fully God and fully man in one person.
He has two distinct natures.
He has the nature of eternal deity and the nature of true humanity united in one person.
And this one person is equal with the Father and the Holy Spirit.
Let's just walk through things John is clearly not saying.
He is not saying there is any inferiority in this word, even the word made flesh, to the Father.
That is he's not saying what in the fourth century the Aryans were saying in a controversy in the church.
where they said Christ was an inferior being to God, but superior to man, something in between man and God.
But this clearly teaches that the word was God.
And like the Arians in the 4th century, so like Jehovah's Witnesses today, I'm not here trying to pick on anybody, but I do want us to understand things that differ so that
Well, on the one hand, perhaps if you are here today, and I don't know everybody here, maybe your background is Mormon or Jehovah's Witness or something else, so that you'll have a better understanding of the Bible's view of these things, but so that Christians, likewise, having a better understanding can be a better blessing to others as we talk about Jesus who is the good news in who he is and what he's done.
Well, Jehovah's Witnesses
like the Aryans make the same mistake, and they do it by mistranslating this verse in their new world translation.
They translate the word was with God, and the word was A, God.
Not God, or not the God, the word was God, but the word was A, God.
And by that they mean something smaller and less significant than the top dog.
deity, right?
And again, that's not what John is teaching here.
And that translation is a mistranslation.
It's not grammatically proper to translate it that way.
It's not contextually compatible with what John says of Jesus here.
John didn't say Jesus was a God, some minor deity.
John says Jesus was God, always God.
And it doesn't say he became God.
That's another thing to say.
It says he was God.
And again, that's contrary to a Mormon view.
They teach that man can become God because man did.
They teach that man became God and Jesus and so can you.
But this passage actually teaches that God became man, not by ceasing his divinity, but by adding to himself true humanity.
so that he remained what he was, even while our Lord Jesus now since the incarnation is distinct from what he always was, not by subtraction, but by addition.
He is fully God and fully man now in a way that is incarnation.
And so this is also this proper view of the full deity of Jesus, this contrary to Unitarianism.
Sometimes you hear about Unitarian churches or Unitarian Universalist churches.
They're around here in various parts.
And there's only one person who is God, and Jesus isn't.
Unitarians teach one God in one divine person, where only the Father is God, only He is eternal, only He is divine, and Jesus is just a man.
He may be a man, they would say close to God, but he's not God.
But again, that's not what John is teaching.
And this is also not modalism.
Now, just the other night, our dear brother Zach in preaching referenced Patrick and the Lutheran satire, which is, if you haven't seen it, Google it.
It's a brief tease on the mistakes people make about the Trinity and about the deity and humanity of Christ.
And one of the things he talks about in there is modalism.
What's modalism?
Well, it's the view that odd appears in different modes of existence at different times.
Such that it's like God wearing a mask.
Some appearing to be the Father,
sometimes appearing to be the Son, sometimes appearing to be the Holy Spirit.
But it's really just one divine person who at various times appears to be three distinct people, like an actor putting on a mask, taking that one off and putting on another one, taking that one off, putting on another.
That's not what this passage is teaching.
It's teaching that Jesus is fully God and always has been.
That there eternally exists three distinct persons in the one divine being, the one divine essence, the one divine nature.
And so there's just so much here isn't there.
We're seeing two persons of the Trinity here.
The word was with God in reference to the Father and the Son.
And of course, as we've mentioned,
the Holy Spirit likewise.
These three persons are one in essence, one in nature, one in eternality, right?
One in, well, I've said nature or essence or being, sometimes we use the word substance, but we don't mean anything substantial so it can be confusing.
But one in essence equal, equal in power,
and glory.
One is not greater than the other two.
And so the Father is not the Son and the Son is not the Holy Spirit.
The Holy Spirit is not, but they are distinct from one another even as they are one sharing the same exact identical nature.
There is therefore no comparable analogy on earth.
There's no analogy in human experience that exactly gets
what God is like.
Ask me about it later, but you can't reference eggs, you can't reference trees, and you can't reference water in its various states, and still properly emphasize the oneness and the threeness.
All analogies tend to emphasize the threeness against the oneness or the oneness against the threeness.
Do you see how this can blow your mind?
Well, I think it was Augustine, but one said with regard to the doctrine of the Trinity, we speak in order not to remain silent.
That is to say we have to say something according to Scripture because so many others are saying so many things that aren't true about the doctrine of the Trinity.
So we have to speak to say it's not that, it's not that, it's not this, it's not this, but there's in a way less we can say about what
God is.
And there's more we can say about what God is not.
We have to say something about both.
And so a reminder here of the preexistence and the coexistence and the divine existence of this word.
And notice as we press on in the passage, verse three, all things were made through him.
And without Him was not anything made that was made.
This is the Word, the Creator of the existence of the universe.
All things made through Him.
Creation was a work of God the Son.
No less than it was a work of God the Father and God the Holy Spirit.
As Colossians 1 puts it, and we're going to confess, we believe this,
before we take the supper together, just reading Colossians 1, for by him all things were created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities, all things were created through him and for him.
So if not the slightest thing was created without him, then nothing was created without him, and therefore he himself cannot be a created thing.
And that's what John's saying.
He's not a created thing.
Everything that exists that is created, He brought it into being.
And that means you.
That means you.
You're not a self-creator.
You didn't make yourself, you didn't give yourself life.
You don't even sustain your own life.
And as many have come to realize, life is really fragile.
And every breath we take is sustained by God Himself until
Our time is up.
But Jesus made us.
And why did He make us?
He made us for Himself.
He made us for His glory.
What's the chief end of man?
That man may glorify God and enjoy Him forever.
He made you, after the image of God, to dwell with Him forever in the happiness of the holiness of heaven.
even face to face with God.
He created all things and noticed fifthly that he is the source of all life.
Verse four, in him was life and the life was the light of men.
He's the fountain from which the river of life flows.
His life was not given to him.
Life was in him inherently, innately.
He was life, and so he is the source of all spiritual life.
As he'll later say of himself in the Gospel of John, I am the way and the truth and the life.
This is why he can say, and also in John, I am the resurrection and the life.
If anyone believes in me, though, he were dead, yet shall he live, because I am
The life and anyone who lives and believes in me shall never die."
Why?
Because I am the life.
And so it is that not only the physical life that you have, you receive from him as a gift, not only the present continuance of the life that you have is by his continued gift, but if you would have spiritual life, if you would have everlasting life,
you must likewise get it from him, and as a gift.
And so we see his pre-existence, we see his coexistence, his divine existence, we see the Creator, the universe brings into existence everything, and he's the source of everlasting existence in the life with God forever.
And finally we see, and briefly here, he became man.
That is, he and flesh
verse 14, and the word became flesh and dwelt among us.
And we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
What John is saying is not that he laid aside his divinity, but again, he added to himself humanity without ceasing his divinity.
He became what he was not without ceasing to be what he was.
He was divine, but had not yet become fully human until the incarnation.
And he did it.
So that him writers we reference, the Carol, failed in, oh, the, I failed last night.
because there is a way to understand Jesus walking on the earth and not having everybody see in an unveiled way the glory of the eternal Holy One.
But his divinity was as it were veiled
in his humanity and for a good purpose.
I mean, what sinful human could see God in all his unveiled uncovered majesty and glory and beauty without being destroyed by the blazing light and heat of his infinite greatness?
I mean, after all, even the unfallen, sinless angels cover their eyes in the presence of the glory of the Lord.
How would anybody have stood in the presence of Christ in unveiled glory upon the earth?
And why did he veil his glory while having become like what?
And John puts it this way.
He dwelt among us.
And he uses the word tabernacled.
among us.
That's another expression for the tent of meeting from your Old Testament stories.
You remember the Old Testament tabernacle.
It was a place where sinners could draw near to God in fellowship with God and communion with God even with a holy God and be welcomed and not cast away.
It's where sinful men and sinful women and sinful boys and girls.
could gather up around the one true holy God and be welcomed.
The Tabernacle was the place where heaven and earth meet, where God and man meet.
And John is saying, that's actually Jesus.
The Tabernacle was a picture of and a promise of Jesus such that it is safe
to come to God in all his holy righteousness.
It is safe to come to God through Jesus and you are invited to do so.
Now why did he have to take our flesh?
Well, lots of reasons we'll look into next week, but of course so that he could die for our sins because the wages of sin is death and we have sinned.
And so he took on our flesh so that he could stand in for us as a truly human being.
Why was it required that he be God?
Why do we need a mediator who is both God and man?
Here, let me point you to the Westminster larger catechism question 38.
Google it when you get home.
It was required or requisite, but it was necessary that the mediator should be God.
Why?
Now listen to this that he might sustain and keep the human nature, his human nature, from sinking under the infinite wrath of God and the power of death.
How did Christ upon a cross bearing shame and scoffing rude and saying, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me and suffering the
just judgment of sinners in their place.
How did Jesus in His humanity not once sin in anger, in wrath, in cursing that He should be thus cursed?
Well, it was the humanity united to the divinity that sustained His humanity
in that condition.
Now that's not the larger catechism, I started preaching it, but you hear what I'm saying.
It kept the human nature from sinking under the infinite wrath of God and the power of death.
How did death not consume him?
And also the catechism says to give worth and efficacy, worth and effectiveness so that it accomplished what it was supposed to.
Worth an efficacy to his sufferings, his obedience, and his intercession.
And so satisfy God's justice and procure his favor and purchase a peculiar people, his spirit to them, conquer all their enemies and bring them to everlasting salvation.
It was so that he could guarantee you all the blessings of God that he had to be God and man in one person.
So the great thing about Christmas, to put it in crass commercial terms,
is not Black Friday where you get more for less with no money down.
Buy now and pay later.
That's not the great blessing of Christmas.
The great thing about Christmas is that you can get all that God has promised to give with no money down, no money due, no payments owed because the Father has given you the gift of His Son and all things belong to Him
and he shares all things with all who are united to him through faith in him.
Put your hope, put your trust in him, and he is yours and you are his.
So, dear Christians, rejoice and worship him.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you for the wonder of a baby born to a virgin
raised and crucified and then raised from the dead when ascended and seated and coming again.
We glory in and we boast in him and his work.
May he be honored and glorified among us and may we be blessed by him in Jesus name.
Amen.
Amen, let's stand together and sing.